---
title: Django Stocks App
date: 2021-05-10 11:20:20 +0530
# categories: [TOP_CATEGORIE, SUB_CATEGORIE]
categories: [ALL_PROJECTS]
tags: # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

# Stocks App

## Introduction
* A web site where you can view quotes of various companies just by entering their ticker symbol. You can search for multiple quotes by entering multiple ticker symbols in comma separated form in the search box. Additionaly you can keep track of your favorite companies quotes by adding them to your portfolio.  All the datas are fetched from API and displayed after formatting and styling them.

## Features
* Search - You can search for any comapy's quotes by entering their ticker symbol in search box. If you don't know the symbol you can find it on the site for which hyperlink is provided in the home page. You can also search for multiple companies by entering their ticker symbol in comma separated way.
* Portfolio
    * In your portfolio you can add your favorite  companies to watch their stocks regularly.
    * Here you can add or delete any stock.
    * All of your previously added companis stocks data is displayed in a table in cleaned and formatted way.
    * Following fields are provided in the table
        * Ticker symbol
        * Stock price
        * Previous close
        * Price to earning ratio
        * Market capitalization
        * 52 week range
        * Bid-ask size
        * Revenue
        * Earning per sale
* API used
    * all the stocks data are retrived from the API in JSON format.
    * And after fomatting and extracting the useful part it is rendered to the user in html format.
* Validation of data is used for every input field.
* All the currencies are in dollar and abbreviated as follows -:
    * B - billion
    * T - trillion
    * M - million
## Tools and Technologies
* django
* Sqlite
* API call
* HTML
* CSS
* bootstrap
* Javascript

## Links
* [github](https://github.com/shivam6522/stocks-app)
* [website](https://stock-market-stats.herokuapp.com/)

