---
title: Node.js Authentication System
date: 2021-04-15 11:20:20 +0530
# categories: [TOP_CATEGORIE, SUB_CATEGORIE]
categories: [ALL_PROJECTS]
tags: node_auth      # TAG names should always be lowercase
---


<!-- # Node.js Authentication System -->

## Introduction
* Node.js authentication system with functionality of login, logout, register, email verification, change password , reset password, delete account etc. It uses passport authentication, express session maintainance, bcrypt for password hashing, nodemailer and OAuth2 to generate and send emails , JWT token to generate verification and reset links and mongodb as database to store user information.

## Features and Functionlities
* Register
    * Users can register themselves via register page.
    * You need to enter your name, email id (which will be the username) and password.
    * There is restriction in input length of max 200 chars for each input field to avoid XSS attacks.
    * Additionally input validation is done for each input field.
    * To make password strong there is a basic password strength checker code of javascript.
    * already registered emails will be redirected to login page.
    * you need to enter a valid email.
* Email verification and activation
    * After submitting the registeration form an email verification link will be sent to the email id used for registration.
    * email link is generated with the help of JWT token and base url.
    * name, email and passwords are encrypted with JWT key in the activation url.
    * nodemailer is responsible to send the email with developers account as sender.
    * it uses gmail service and OAuth2 as authentication to create email transporter.
    * Then transporter sends the email with the content and details provided.
    * After the link is sent it is valid for only 30 mins.
    * Once the user clicks the link the system validates the link and activates the account and you are redirected to login page.
* Login
    * you enter your email id and password to log into the system.
    * Again these two fields are verified and validated.
    * Once the previous step is successful a session is created for you and you are redirected to home page otherwise get the error message.
* Logout
    * After you click on logout your session is terminated and you are redirected to login page.
    * after logout you cant just click back arrow to go to the previous page since every authorised page is checked for user authentication.
* Password reset
    * In case you don't remember your password you can always reset it if you have access to your registered email.
    * After entering the email on password reset page you are sent a password reset link.
    * The email sending and link generation process is smae as in email verification process.
    * Through the link you are securely redirected to password reset page which is attached with your email id.
    * Once you reset you can login into the system with your new password.
* Change password
    * Additionlly in case you ever feel that your password is somewhat weak or someone hacked your passwrod you can change it.
    * here also old password is verified and new password is validated for it's strength.
* Delete account
    * You can delete your account if you don't want to continuew with it.
    * To avoid deleting account by mistake in one click, you need to enter the passphrase `confirm` to confirm your deletion.
    * once you submit the form your account and information is permanently deleted from the database.

## Tools and Technologies
* Node.js
    * Framework
* express.js
    * to maintain and manage user sessions.
* mongodb
    * Documented database to store user's informations.
* googleapis
    * to connect to and use google APIs.
* JWT
    * To generate tokens for verification and reset links.
* moongoose
    * To connect and use mongo db with node.js
* Javascript
    * To implement entire system's backend and frontend logic.
* HTML
    * To manage content and structure of the web page.
* CSS
    * Manages layout, design, and look of a web page.
* bootstrap.
    * CSS framework which arranges and manages the layout of website.

## Links
* [github](https://github.com/shivam6522/Nodejs-authentication-system)