---
title: Django Rest API similar to Pastebin
date: 2021-05-20 11:20:20 +0530
# categories: [TOP_CATEGORIE, SUB_CATEGORIE]
categories: [ALL_PROJECTS]
tags: rest_api      # TAG names should always be lowercase
---


## Introduction

- Created a Model backed Browsable API which let user’s share their code or any other text by creating snippets using the API. Additionally users have all the CRUD functionality with object level permission management and can change a few aesthetics.

## Features and Components

- MVT design pattern
    - In actual it resembles MVC the only diffrence is that Controller in MVC is equivalent to `views` in Django and views in MVC is equivalent to `templates` in Django.
    - In other words it's Acronym corresponding to **MVC** can be perceived as **MTV**.
- Serialization
    - first model instance is translated into python native data types like dict 
    - then the python data is formatted and rendered using JSON
    - finally rendered output is displayed using views.
- Deseralization
    - first we parse the user input string to python native data types
    - and then we convert them to fully populated object instance.
- CSRF(Cross-Site Request Forgery) token
    - A CSRF token is a unique, secret, unpredictable value that is generated by the server-side application and transmitted to the client in such a way that it is included in a subsequent HTTP request made by the client
    - used to check if the request is from a legitimate and authorised client.
- Request objects
    - similar to http request with some added functionlity.
    - request.POST - only works with POST method
    - request.data(in django) - works for POST, PUT and PATCH methods.
    - it can handle many formats of input data.
- Response objects
    - it's type of a template response.
    - renders correct content type as requested by the client for e.g(JSON type).
    - can reder response in many formats like html, JSON etc.
- Wrappers
    - decorators @api_view used with function based views.
    - class APIVIEW used with class based views.
    - these provide additional functions like handling parse error exception and adding context to response for content negotiaton
    - **content negotiation**
        - Content negotiation refers to mechanisms defined as a part of HTTP that make it possible to serve different versions of a document at the same URI.
        - Content Negotiation in REST APIs means resources can have multiple presentations, mostly because there may be multiple different clients expecting different representations.
- Adding fomat suffix to urls
    - urls can be used to retive data in different formats by providing different header content type in command line
    - http://127.0.0.1:8000/snippets.json  # JSON suffix
    - http://127.0.0.1:8000/snippets.api   # Browsable API suffix
- Function based views
    - we use functions to define views
- Class based views
    - it lets us reuse some common functionalities
    - one of the major benefit of this is we can use mixins and generic views etc.
    - **Mixins**
        - since all major CRUD  operations are same in all model backed APIs those are already implemented by rest framework's mixin classes
        - we use one generic class to provide core functionalities and use mixins each for create(), update(), retrive(), delete(), list() operations.
    - **Generic view**
        - rest framework provides some genric views with already mixed-in views like generics.ListCreateAPIView
        - it makes our code for views.py very little and clean
        - it's like God of all views
- find in detail about function and class based views [here](https://medium.com/@ksarthak4ever/django-class-based-views-vs-function-based-view-e74b47b2e41b)

- Authentication and permissions
    - Code snippets are always associated with a creator.
        - An owner field is created in model and auth.user is added (default auth model of django) as foreign key of this field and relate it with snippet
        - add snippet list and details views for users to get the associated snippets with their id.
    - Only authenticated users may create snippets.
        - A serializer class is created for user model with snippet model data as it's field because snippet is not related directly to user although reverse is true
    - Only the creator of a snippet may update or delete it.
        - associate snippets with user automatically by modyfying create() function of serializer and add owner username in snippet details
    - Unauthenticated requests should have full read-only access. 
        - using rest framework permissons module we can associate permissons to views like `IsAuthenticatedOrReadOnly` will permit read write to autheticated users and only read access to others.
    - object level permissions 
        - if the requested user is owner then we provide him edit access otherwise read-only access
        - for this we create a custom permission class and add it to our `SnippetDetail` view class's permissions property
    - login and logout views
        - add login url by including this in your urlpatterns - path('api-auth/', include('rest_framework.urls'))
    - authentcation
        - by default `SessionAuthentication` and `BasicAuthentication` is used when API is accessed through browser
        - if you access it through terminal or programmatically you need to provide authentication credentials on each request.
- snippet highlighting (highlight syntax)
    - A highlight field is created in model which also contains code snippet apart from raw code snippet field
    - use pygments library for this and style field of your model
- hyperlinks and pagination
    - Endpoint for root of our API is created which acts as an entry point to our API and contains the list of all the users and snippets.
    - Endpoint for highlighted snippet is created which is rendered using rest framework's pre-rendered html rather than using templates.
    -  Modify serializers to extend `HyperlinkedModelSerializer` instead of the existing `ModelSerializer`
    - The HyperlinkedModelSerializer has the following differences from ModelSerializer:
        - It does not include the id field by default.
        - It includes a url field, using HyperlinkedIdentityField.
        - Relationships use HyperlinkedRelatedField, instead of PrimaryKeyRelatedField.
    - In order to handle large number of user and snippet list pagination is added which restricts list size in a single page to 10 and adds page numbers.
- Browsable
    - API is fully browsable.
    - you can follow the links to find your way around in the API
- Used Viewsets and Routers
    - `Viewsets` allows the developer to concentrate on modeling the state and interactions of the API, and leave the URL construction to be handled automatically, based on common conventions.
    - `Routers` binds viewsets to url automatically all we need to do is to register appropriate viewsets with routers.
    - Registering the viewsets with the router is similar to providing a urlpattern. We include two arguments - the URL prefix for the views, and the viewset itself.
- used http response codes 
    - rest framework uses error codes with detail like  404_bad_request so that we don't use wrong code by mistake

    - 1xx - informational respons 
        - 100 - continue, everything is ok client should continue the request
    - 2xx - successful responses
        - 200 - ok request has succeeded
    - 3xx - redirect to different server
        - 300 - request has more than one possible response
        - 301 - requested resourse has moved permanently 
    - 4xx - client side error
        - 400 - bad request
        - 404 - requested resource not found
    - 5xx - server side error
        - 500 - internal server error
        - 503 - service unavailable


## Tools and Technologies Used
* Django
    * Development framework
* Django-rest-framework
    * The complete package to develop an API
* Python
    * programming language used to implement logic

## Links
* [github](https://github.com/shivam6522/Nodejs-authentication-system)
